DISPLIB: a library of train dispatching problems
Oddvar Kloster, Bjørnar Luteberget, Carlo Mannino, Giorgio Sartor
Abstract
Optimization-based decision support systems have a significant potential to reduce delays, and
thus improve efficiency on the railways, by automatically re-routing and re-scheduling trains after
delays have occurred. The operations research community has dedicated a lot of effort to de-
veloping optimization algorithms for this problem, but each study is typically tightly connected
with a specific industrial use case. Code and data are seldom shared publicly. This fact hinders
reproducibility, and has led to a proliferation of papers describing algorithms for more or less
compatible problem definitions, without any real opportunity for readers to assess their relative
performance. Inspired by the successful communities around MILP, SAT, TSP, VRP, etc., we
introduce a common problem definition and file format, DISPLIB, which captures all the main
features of train re-routing and re-scheduling. We have gathered problem instances from multiple
real-world use cases and made them openly available. In this paper, we describe the problem defi-
nition, the industrial instances, and a reference solver implementation. This allows any researcher
or developer to work on the train dispatching problem without an industrial connection, and en-
ables the research community to perform empirical comparisons between solvers. All materials
are available online athttps://displib.github.io.
1. Introduction
The trains traveling on a railway network typically follow a strict timetable. However, when
unexpected delays happen, train dispatchers need to re-route and re-schedule the trains to prevent
delays from propagating to other trains. The current practice in the railway industry is that a
group of dispatchers, typically located in a central control room, handle the decision-making
manually. This work is notoriously difficult when there are major disturbances in the traffic, and
the decisions made in stressful situations will often be sub-optimal.
In the last ten years, digitalization of railways have progressed to the point where most railway
operators now have sensors and computer systems to keep track of where trains are at any point
in time, and some operators also have graphical user interfaces for managing real-time updates
to timetables. With this digital infrastructure in place, there is every opportunity to make use
of algorithmic decision support for dispatchers, which could alleviate some of the workload for
dispatchers and result in more optimal re-routing and re-scheduling decisions. And indeed, quite
a lot of academic and industrial research efforts have gone into developing algorithms that are able
to solve train dispatching optimization problems. Algorithms based on mixed-integer linear pro-
gramming (MILP) are the most common, but most of the methods from the optimization toolbox
have been applied, including heuristics, local search, branch and bound, constraint programming,
Boolean satisfiability, reinforcement learning, decompositions, and more (see the surveys [2, 8, 16]).
Solving train dispatching optimization problems have proven to be hard, both theoretically
and in practice. Theoretically, the problem is NP-hard [19], even when limited to find a feasible
solution. Also, in terms of algorithm implementation, none of the scientific papers published on
this topic has been able to provide an algorithm that handles all relevant problem instances and
gives high-quality solutions in the short amount of time available in the real-time setting. Indeed,
in industrial deployments, combinations of exact methods and heuristics, applied on decomposi-
tions at different time/space scales, are currently required to achieve state-of-the-art scalability
[1]. Further improvements in solution methods are highly desired by the industry, so that train
arXiv:2509.12254v1  [cs.AI]  12 Sep 2025
dispatching optimization can be applied more easily and in a wider range of situations. Further-
more, the train dispatching problem also takes the role as a sub-problem problem in a host of other
railway planning problems which are influenced by decisions about routing and scheduling. This
includes strategic timetabling [23], short-term timetabling [13, 15], line planning [25], rolling stock
rotation [17], etc. All of these problems would benefit from advances in optimization techniques
for the core routing and scheduling problem, i.e., the train dispatching problem.
Comparing the situation in the science of train dispatching to the communities around other
optimization problems, such as the vehicle routing problem (VRP), may provide some insight
into how the academic community should organize in order to make more progress and have
more impact. VRP was first introduced in the scientific literature in 1959 [6], at which time
only the tiniest problem instances could be solved with any expectation of producing solutions
of decent quality. Compare this with today’s situation, where industrial software developers can
easily procure mature software libraries such as PyVRP and Google OR-Tools and set up solvers
for highly customized problem variants, often achieving near-optimal solutions even for large-
scale instances. In the 1980s and ’90s, several influential VRP researchers published sets of hard
VRP problem instances. These instances became standard benchmarks, and authors of papers
presenting new algorithmic developments were expected to demonstrate performance by reporting
the results they had achieved on these instances. The existence of a hard measure of algorithm
performance spurred quite a bit of healthy competition, and made it easy for researchers to
demonstrate to their colleagues how good their algorithms were.
Impressive algorithmic progress has happened in several other communities where such a stan-
dard for benchmarking has been central, e.g., mixed-integer linear programming [9], Boolean
satisifability [10], and traveling salesman problem [22]. We believe that facilitating such compar-
isons can have a great positive impact on scientific progress, and that progress in train dispatching
algorithms is currently impeded by the lack of such a standard for benchmarking. There have
been some benchmarking efforts centered around competitions, such as the Informs RAS Problem
Solving Competitions [11], the Flatland Challenge [20], and the SBB Train Schedule Optimisation
Challenge [12]. These efforts were not aimed to create a general benchmarking framework for
realistic and diverse problem instances, but were based on specific case studies, with few prob-
lem instances, and using more ad-hoc file formats. And indeed, very few papers suggesting new
train dispatching methods use these problem instances to demonstrate algorithmic performance
characteristics.
To improve on this situation, we are in this paper proposing a problem definition called
DISPLIB that encompasses most important features of train re-routing and re-scheduling prob-
lems, while still being simple enough that minimal domain knowledge of railway operations is
required to understand it, and that algorithmic ideas can be implemented without getting hin-
dered by an inordinately complex problem representation. The intention is not necessarily that
industrial applications should use exactly this problem definition, but that the problem definition
is close enough to relevant industrial problems, so that progress in solving DISPLIB problems will
translate into progress in train dispatching optimization in general.
We have also gathered a diverse set of problem instances from railway infrastructure managers
from multiple countries to form the first version of the DISPLIB benchmark instance set, called
DISPLIB 2025. To create awareness and interest, we held a competition, running from October
2024 to April 2025, to encourage the train dispatching research community to come up with a
general algorithm working for all the problem instances. Many great contributions were submitted,
but only a few managed to create algorithms that could produce feasible solutions to all the
instances, and there are still many problem instances for which no optimal solution was found.
This confirms that the DISPLIB 2025 is a challenging set of benchmark instances that can be
used by researchers in the coming years to create easily comparable and reproducible performance
results. In the future, we intend to continue gathering problem instances to cover a wider range of
applicationcontexts. Also, ifthecommunitycomesupwithalgorithmsthancansolvetheinstances
of DISPLIB 2025 to near-optimality within a short amount of time, we also hope to gather and
provide even harder problem instances to spur continued progress in the field in a future version of
the benchmark library. File downloads are available online athttps://displib.github.io, and
2
o1
δ1 = 5, β1 = 0
Ψ1 ={(R 1,0)}
o2
δ2 = 0
Ψ2 =
{(R1,3),(R 2,5)}
o3
δ3 = 0
Ψ3 =
{(R1,2),(R 3,4)}
o4
δ4 = 5,α 4 = 5
Ψ4 ={(R 4,2)}
o5
δ5 = 0
Ψ5 ={(R 5,2)}
o6
δ6 = 0
Ψ6 ={(R 6,3)}
o7,δ 7 = 0
β7 = 10
Ψ7 =∅
entry op. exit op.
Figure 1: A train operation graph. The boxes represent operationoi, fori= 1, . . . ,7, labeled with a minimum
duration (δi), upper and lower bounds (αi,β i) and a setΨi of resources from the setR={R 1, R2, . . .}to which it
needs exclusive access with corresponding release times. Some parameters are left out to simplify the presentation
(assumeα= 0,β=∞,λ= 0where omitted). The green nodeo 1 is the entry operation (it has no incoming edges),
and the red node labeledo7 is the exit operation (it has no outgoing edges). An example of a route for this train
would be the sequenceπ=⟨o 1, o2, o4, o6, o7⟩.
future updates to the set of benchmark instances and competition details will be posted there.
2. The DISPLIB problem definition
In this section, we will define the DISPLIB routing and scheduling problem and then show
how it is suitable for modelling real-time train dispatching problem instances.
LetIbe a set of trains. Each traini∈Iperforms a sequence of operationsπ i selected from
a setO i =

oi
1, oi
2, . . . , oi
ni
	
ofn i potential operations. This sequence must start with theentry
operation,o i
1 ∈O i, and end with theexit operation,oi
ni. A successor relationSi ⊂O i ×O i restricts
which pairs(oi
a, oi
b)∈S i are allowed to be immediate successors inπi.S i defines a directed acyclic
graph, and the sequenceπi must thus be a path in this graph starting fromoi
1 and ending inoi
ni
(see Figure 1). Such a sequenceπi is called aroutefor the traini.
For each operationo i
a ∈O i, there is a specified minimum durationδi
a ≥0, a lower bound
αi
a ≥0, and an upper boundβ i
a ≥0. Given a specific routeπ i, we associate with each operation
oi
a ∈π i astart timet i
a. An operation ends when the next operation in the train’s path starts,
i.e., for any pair of consecutive operationso i
a ando i
b inπ i, we denote the successor operation
oi
a+ =o i
b and define theend timeofo i
a ast i
a+ =t i
b (for the last operation in the sequence, we
definet i
a+ =∞). Then, for eacho i
a ∈π i, we require:
αi
a ≤t i
a ≤β i
a andt i
a +δ i
a ≤t i
a+ .
Such values ofti
a associated with eachoi
a ∈π i define aschedulefor the trainiwith routeπ i.
Additionally, each operation may require exclusive access to one or more resources. We denote
withRthe set of all resources. Then, with each each operationoi
a, we associate a set of resource
requirementsΨ i
a ={. . . ,(r, λ), . . .}, wherer∈ Ris a resource required by the operation and
λ∈Ris a release time. The resource is occupied by the operation from the start of the operation
and untilλtime units after the end of the operation.
Combiningtheroutesandschedulesofalltrains, wedefineasolutionasasequenceofoperations
and their corresponding start times, ordered chronologically,
Π =⟨. . . ,(o, t), . . .⟩
Denote byη(oi
a)the position ofo i
a in the sequenceΠ. Ifoi
a is the last operation inπi, we define
η(oi
a+) =∞. Then we can give the following definition:
Definition 1.Feasible solution.A solutionΠis feasible if:
1.For each traini∈I, the subsequence ofΠof the operations⟨o i
a, oi
b, . . .⟩fromO i, is a route
πi, and the corresponding timesti
a, ti
b, . . .define a schedule forπ i;
3
2.For any pair of operationso i
a, oj
b ∈Π, withη(o i
a)< η(o j
b)andi̸=j, and for any pair
(r, λ)∈Ψ i
a and(r ′, λ′)∈Ψ j
b withr=r ′, we have:
η(oi
a+)< η(o j
b),andt i
a+ +λ≤t j
b.
In other words, we are asking that: (1) each train is routed and scheduled correctly, inde-
pendently of the other trains; (2) for every pair of operations (of different trains) that requires
the same resource, then the operation that appears first in the solution must terminate, and the
release time must elapse, before the other operation starts.
Note that if all the durationsδand release timesλwere strictly positive, it would not be
necessary to describe the ordering of operationsΠexplicitly, since any ordering by non-decreasing
start times would be correct. However, to ensure correctness even when allowing instantaneous
operations (δ= 0) or instantaneous release (λ= 0), the solution must be specified as a globally
ordered sequence of operations. This can be convenient in macroscopic railway models (see Sec-
tion 2.1), and allows the problem definition to accommodate real-world problems from a more
diverse set of sources.
The cost of a solution is defined as the sumZ(Π) =P
c∈C z(c,Π)over a setCof objective
components, wherez(·)is a measure of the delay of a componentcj with respect to the current
solutionΠand each componentc= (o i
a, ¯t, γ, ζ)defines a linear function associated with the start
timet i
a of a specific operation operationoi
a ∈O i,i∈I. We definez(·) = 0if the operationo i
a
is not in the routeπi. Otherwise, the measurez(·)is defined by a threshold ¯t, after which the
train is delayed and incurs a costγproportional to the length of the delay, or a constant costζ,
or both:
z(c,Π) =
(
γ·max

0, ti
a − t
	
+ζ·H(t i
a − t)ifo i
a ∈π i
0otherwise.
Here,H(t)is the step function, i.e.,H(t) = 0ift <0, andH(t) = 1ift≥0. This allows for a
combination of different piecewise linear functions (see Figure 3).
Definition 2.Optimal solution.A solutionΠis optimal if it feasible and the total costZ(Π)
is the minimum among all feasible solutions.
A JSON file format for the input and output data used in this problem definition is described
in Appendix A. Note that in the JSON format, all numerical parameters are restricted to have
integer values, to avoid any issues related to numerical accuracy. In most railway applications,
time values and durations are described in seconds, so using the time unit of 1 second will typically
be sufficiently precise for describing the problem instances encountered in practice.
2.1. Real-time train dispatching as a DISPLIB problem
The definitions above are motivated by the practical needs to model real-time train dispatching
problems. We will now show an example of how to define the set of resourcesR, and then the set
of operationsO i for a traini.
Thesignaling block system(orfixed-block signaling) is a safety system used in most railway
operations around the world today. The basic principle is that the railway tracks are divided into
a set ofblock sections, which are sections of the infrastructure that are only allowed to be occupied
by one train at a time. We will use resources to represent such block sections. Depending on the
application context, the block sections may correspond directly to the track circuits used by the
control system to detect trains, or they may represent more approximate regions, such as the main
and siding tracks used for meeting and overtaking, as illustrated in Figure 2.
A dispatching problem instance is limited in scope to a dispatching region, i.e., some connected
subset of a railway network. We assume that we can disregard the part of the railway network that
lies outside the dispatching region. Now, we imagine that the train in Figure 2 has not started
traveling yet. This means that it is currently either parked at a depot, or is traveling somewhere
outside the dispatching region. Assume also that the train is planned to start (e.g. from the official
4
R1
R2 R3
R4
R5 R6
R7
R8
Figure 2: Railway infrastructure divided into block sections (R1, R2, . . .) and a train, starting fromR2, traveling
through the infrastructure to end up inR8.
timetable) at some time¯t0 in the future from the platform represented by the resourceR2, and we
allow the start time to be postponed. Then, the entry operationo1 hasα 1 = ¯t0 andβ=∞, and
Ψ1 ={(r 1, λ1)}using resourcer 1 =R 2. The release timeλ1 represents the minimum lap between
when the train starts its next operation (which will be traveling onR3), and when another train
may start an operation occupyingR2, and it is often computed as the length of the train divided
by its nominal speed. The minimum durationδ1 represents the time that the train would use to
travel through the sectionR2.
Note that in some application contexts where a macroscopic view of the schedule is desired, it
may be reasonable to useλ1 = 0, and evenδ1 = 0. As an example, a northbound train might arrive
from a single-track section into a station at 12:00 while another southbound train is scheduled to
depart from the same station at 12:00 on the same single-track section. Taken literally, these
trains would need to be infinitesimally short for these events to both happen at 12:00. However,
this type of model appears in real-world applications, and it would cause inconvenient cascading
changes to the timetable if one would add physically accurate release times.
Continuing with the other sections, we construct operationso 2, o3, o4, o5, o6 for traversing
R3, R4, R5, R6, R8, respectively. Typically,α= 0for most of the operations, but for passen-
ger trains there might be earliest departure times from the stations (since it would not be allowed
to leave earlier than the official timetable time), which would be applied by settingαvalues for
the operations usingR3 andR 6.
To allow the train to leave the infrastructure afterR8, i.e., if the train goes to a depot or leaves
the dispatching region, we add a dummy exit operationo7 withΨ 7 =∅. Finally, we define the
successor relation,
Si ={(o 1, o2),(o 2, o3),(o 2, o4),(o 3, o5),(o 4, o5),(o 5, o6),(o 6, o7)},
describing the routes that the train can take. Observe thatSi defines the arcs of a directed acyclic
graph with verticesOi, and that there is a unique node (operation)o1 with no predecessors and
a unique node (operation)o7 with no successors. To define the cost associated with the train, we
add an objective componentc= (o 6, ¯t, γ, ζ)toCassociated with the operationo 6 when the train
arrives to its final destination. We set¯tto the official timetable time (when the train was planned
to arrive inR8) and letγ= 1andζ= 0.
Following this procedure for all relevant trains in the dispatching region, we get a complete
DISPLIB problem instance, but there are a few more important features of dispatching that should
be taken into account:
•Some trains have already started traveling in the dispatching region. For example, if the
train in Figure 2 has already reachedR4, then we reorganize the operations so that the
operationo 5 corresponding toR 4 becomes the new entry operation. Other operations that
are not reachable throughSi fromo 5 are removed fromOi andS i. The new entry operation
will then haveβ= 0(it starts immediately), and the minimum durationδis reduced by an
amount corresponding to the time that has already elapsed since the train started traveling
onR 4.
•The cost function may have a more complex dependency on the arrival time of a train at its
final destination. Piecewise linear functions have been used in many applications (see, for
example, [3, 14]). To implement the piecewise linear function shown on the left in Figure 3,
5
time
cost
¯t ¯t+ 180 ¯t+ 360
time
cost
¯t
1
2
3
¯t+ 180 ¯t+ 360
Figure 3: Left: a convex piecewise linear function where cost measures delay starting ta¯tand the cost coefficient
of delay increases after 180 and 360 seconds. Right: a step function where the delay increases when the delay
surpasses 0, 180, and 360 seconds.
we can use three objective componentsc1, c2, c3, all applying to the same operation, but
with different thresholds: ¯t1 = ¯t, ¯t2 = ¯t+ 180, ¯t2 = ¯t+ 360, and, e.g.,γ 1 =γ 2 =γ 3 = 1.
Similarly, to implement the piecewise linear function on the right in Figure 3, we use the
same ¯tvalues but let theγvalues be zero and set insteadζ1 =ζ 2 =ζ 3 = 1.
•Trains may be longer than a block section. For example, if the train in Figure 2 is longer
than the block sectionR 4, then the operation that represents traveling throughR 4 will
also have a resource occupation forR3. Even worse, if the train is longer thanR8 andR 6
combined, then traveling throughR8 will also need to occupy eitherR4 orR 5, depending on
the path that the train has taken. Instead of creating one operation per block section, we can
deal with this path dependency by creating one operation per possible subset of resources
that could be occupied when a train’s head is located at the end of a block section. This
transformation is described in more detail in [4], and may, in the worst case, cause the setOi
to become exponentially larger. However, in practice, the relative lengths of block sections
and trains seems to result in reasonably sized setsOi (empirically, it results in at most a
doubling, according to [5]).
•Rolling stock correspondence, i.e., the same wagons are used with a different train identity,
can be implemented by joining two trainsi, jinto a common train withO=O i ∪O j and
S=S i ∪S j ∪
n
(oi
ni , oj
1)
o
.
•Train correspondence constraints, i.e., a pair of trains that are forced to be in a specific
station at the same time, can be implemented by adding an additional resource that one of
the trains requires in all operations preceding the arrival to the station, and that the other
train requires for leaving the station.
•Decisions regarding cancellations (and short-turnings) can be implemented by selecting a
set of relevant operations after which the train could cancel. Then, we add additional
operations that bring the train immediately from these operations to the exit operation, and
we add objective components for these operations with a high cost incurred regardless of the
scheduled time (the threshold is0).
Although the last three items of the list above could be considered less desirable workarounds,
it demonstrates the flexibility of the simple DISPLIB problem definition. Note that, for simplicity,
the infrastructure is not explicitly modelled in the DISPLIB problem definition, except through
the set of resources (for example, there is no graph structure describing the infrastructure).
3. Problem instances
For the DISPLIB 2025 benchmark set, we have gathered problem instances from four main
sources. The instances are divided into 13 categories based on how the instances were produced
from raw data. The categories are the following:
6
•smi: instancesreceivedfromSiemensMobilityItalydescribingtrainsfromafreight-dominated
railwayextractedfromareal-timeinformationsystemfortraindispatching. Ineachinstance,
a small set of trains were extracted from a larger set of trains because they represent particu-
larly challenging interactions. Each train has a long sequence of operations and typically also
a fairly wide range of routing alternatives (i.e., the graph for each train is quite complex).
The number of trains per instances is between 5 and 13. Two subcategories contain different
versions of these instance:
–smi_headway: includes non-zero release times, representing headway times computed
from the train length and average speed.
–smi_close: no such headway requirement between trains.
•nor: Instances received from SINTEF describing parts of the Norwegian national railway
network. Instances were generated from a daily timetable extracted from a real-time infor-
mation system for train dispatching. The timetable was modified by picking a random time
during the day and adding delays to a random set of trains at the selected time. Instances
were filtered so that only the more difficult instances are included. All the railway lines
consists of a combination of double-track and single-track sections. Eight subcategories were
made to distinguish between different lines and difficulty variations:
–nor1_full: describes a railway line in Norway called Jærbanen. The line is 120 km
long with 28 stations and contains all trains for a full day.
–nor1_critical: instances generated in the same way as the previous subcategory, but
where trains that are unlikely to be impacted by the delays are removed.
–nor2: describes a railway line called Gjøvikbanen. The line is 123 km long with 35
stations. The instances are limited to a 6 hour time window.
–nor3: describes a railway line called Kongsvingerbanen. The line is 114 km long with
26 stations. The instances are limited to a 6 hour time window.
–nor4_small: describes a railway line called Dovrebanen. The line is 492 km long with
55 stations, limited to a 6 hour time window.
–nor4_large: same as the previous subcategory, but with the full day time window.
–nor5_small: contains a combination of multiple lines in the Oslo region of Norway,
connected in the Oslo Central Station, limited to a 6 hour time window.
–nor5_large: same as the previous subcategory, but with the full day time window.
•swi: instances based on openly available data from Swiss Federal Railways (SBB). These
instances were prepared for a computational competition [12]. Instances are of increasing
difficulty, ranging from a few trains to up to 467 trains per instance.
•wab: instances received from Wabtec describing a set of trains in a dispatching region, ex-
tracted from a real-time information system for train dispatching. Each of the 16 instances
is made from consecutive snapshots of actual train positions during a period of a few hours.
The routing graph for each train is fairly complex, describing station routing and also min-
imum durations in consecutive stations being dependent on optional stops (i.e., a choice
between stopping in one station or the next one). Two subcategories were made:
–wab_large: all trains in the dispatching region in the next 24 hour period.
–wab_small: same as the previous subcategory, but using a 16 hour period.
A summary of instance characteristics is shown in Table 1.
Together, these categories represent a wide range of situations and represent optimization
problems that are difficult enough to test the limits of the state-of-the-art algorithm for train
scheduling. An algorithm that would produce near-optimal solutions to all of these instances in
less than 1 minute per instance would represent a significant milestone in this scientific field. We
hope that making this collection available to the community will spur progress toward this goal.
7
Data Category Count Trains Operations Resources
source (min.-max.) (min.-max.)
smi smi_close 9 5 – 13 113 – 1975 787
smi_headway 12 5 – 13 113 – 2245 790
nor
nor1_critical 10 4 – 16 148 – 796 95
nor1_full 10 40 – 155 2194 – 8217 95
nor2 5 23 – 23 1448 – 1750 137
nor3 5 21 – 22 1237 – 1325 79
nor4_large 5 171 – 365 17221 – 38125 408
nor4_small 5 157 – 168 16034 – 17907 408
nor5_large 5 346 – 505 34064 – 50934 512
nor5_small 5 261 – 286 25594 – 28248 512
swi swi 9 4 – 467 326 – 52741 1301
wab wab_large 16 44 – 48 5588 – 6054 136
wab_small 16 30 – 30 3285 – 3489 136
Table 1: Problem characteristics of the instances in the DISPLIB 2025, grouped by category. The count column
shows the number of problem instances in the category. The trains column shows the range of the number of trains
in each instance (min.-max.). The operations column lists the number of operations, summed of the trains (also
min.-max. over the category). The resources column shows the total number of resources used in the category.
4. Computational competition
A computational competition was held in connection with the development of the DISPLIB
problem definition and file formats, and gathering of problem instances for DISPLIB 2025. The
goal of the competition was to encourage development of new train dispatching algorithms, but
also to (1) validate that the problem definition and file format were suitable for the purpose and
easily understandable by the community, and (2) make sure that the problem instances were
actually hard enough to pose a significant challenge to the research community.
The competition was divided into two phases. Phase 1 was launched in October 2024, when
the file format and competition rules were posted to the competition web page, together with a
first set of problem instances and a solution verification program. Participants were encouraged to
submit solutions to the phase 1 instances as early as possible, to allow the organizers to fix errors
or clarify instructions. Then, in February 2025, phase 2 was initiated by publishing another set of
harder problem instances on the web page.
The use of existing general-purpose optimization software was allowed (including commercial
solvers such as CPLEX, Gurobi, Xpress, etc.), but the use of multiple unrelated algorithms (such
as portfolio solvers) was discouraged. Participants were required to submit a set of solutions to
the problem instances that they computed using a maximum of 10 minutes of computation time
per instance. This limit is somewhat higher than the typical real-time requirement, which is often
in the range of 1-2 minutes, in order to encourage submission of algorithmic ideas that were not
necessarily carefully implemented or fine-tuned for real-time usage. A rank-based scoring system
was used to give points to the participants according to their solution quality and coverage, similar
to the ITC2021 competition [24]). Points are awarded to each solution based on the position among
its competitors, and phase 2 instances were given more points.
In addition to the solutions to the problem instances, the participants were required to submit
a short report describing their algorithm. An international panel of experts of railway optimization
evaluated the submissions based on the scoring and the quality and novelty of the report. The
panel selected a group of finalists who were invited to present their algorithms at the International
Conference on Optimization and Decision Science (ODS) 2025. More details about the competition
rules and detailed results are available from the web pagehttps://displib.github.io/.
The competition and the gathering of problem instances validated that the problem definition
was general enough to represent a wide range of data sources, and the file format was understand-
able by the participants. Indeed, the top performing teams had very few clarification questions to
8
the competition organizers. Furthermore, none of the teams managed to solve all instances to op-
timality, and no team outperformed all other teams on all instance categories, which confirms that
the instances are challenging and suggests that the state of the art can be improved by developing
better algorithms.
5. Reference MILP model
To provide a reference model for solving the DISPLIB problem instances, we present here
a translation into mixed-integer linear programming (MILP). This model is presented only to
provide a correct MILP formulation, which can be used for comparison, testing and inspiration.
For modeling train scheduling problems using MILP, the literature is mostly divided between
big-Mand time-indexed formulations [7]. Here we present a big-Mformulation, which is arguably
the most direct way of modeling, and appears to be the most commonly used method in recent
state-of-the-art implementations (see, for example, [13, 18, 21]).
Reusing the notation of Section 2, we start by defining the continuous variablest i
a ∈R,
αi
a ≤t i
a ≤β i
a, to represent the start time of operationoi
a ∈O i for traini, whereα i
a andβ i
a are
the lower bound and upper bound respectively.
First, we will focus on modeling the routing and minimum running times of the trains. For
each operationo i
a ∈O i of each traini∈I, we introduce a variablex i
a ∈ {0,1}that is equal to
1 if and only if the operationoi
a is part of the routeπ i. Similarly, for each pair of operations
(oi
a, oi
b)∈S i, we introduce a variableyi
a,b ∈ {0,1}that is equal to 1 if and only if we chooseoi
a
ando i
b to be immediate successors in the routeπi. Then, we defineS i
a as the set of successor
operations ofo i
a, i.e.,S i
a ={o i
b ∈O i : (oi
a, oi
b)∈S i}, and withPi
a the set of predecessor operations
ofo i
a, i.e.,P i
a ={o i
b ∈O i : (oi
b, oi
a)∈S i}. We can now introduce the correspondingrunning times
and routing constraints:
P
oi
b∈Si
1
yi
1,b = 1i∈I,
P
oia∈P ini
yi
a,ni = 1i∈I,
P
oia∈P ic
yi
a,c = P
oi
b∈Si
c
yi
c,b oi
c ∈O i \ {oi
1, oi
ni }, i∈I,
yi
a,b ≤x i
a
yi
a,b ≤x i
b
xi
a +x i
b −1≤y i
a,b
ti
b −t i
a ≥δ i
a ·y i
a,b



(oi
a, oi
b)∈S i, i∈I
(1)
The first three constraints are the classical flow conservation constraints that guarantee that we
are choosing a path from entry to exit (i.e., a route), while the next three constraints make sure
that the operations along this path are selected. The last constraint enforces the minimum running
time constraints between two subsequent operations in the chosen path1.
We can now focus on the exclusive access to resources. We first defineO=∪i∈I Oi as the set
of all train operations and then we introduce the setAof all pairs of train operations (of different
trains) that require the same resource, that is:
A=
n
{oi
a, oj
b}:o i
a, aj
b ∈O, i̸=j,∃(r, λ)∈Ψ i
a,∃(r ′, λ′)∈Ψ j
b, r=r ′
o
.
This is the set of all pairs of train operations that can potentially be in conflict. Next, for every
pair{o i
a, oj
b} ∈ A, we introduce the binary variablezi,j
a,b ∈ {0,1}that is equal to 1 if and only if
1Without giving technical details which would go beyond the scope of the paper, we remark that we can avoid
the use of a classical big-Mconstraint here thanks to the the fact that the graph of operations(Oi, Si)associated
with any trainiis acyclic.
9
operationo i
a precedes operationo j
b. This means not only thatoi
a starts beforeo j
b, but also that
oi
a finishes beforeo j
b starts. For example, ifzi,j
a,b = 1, then all the successor operations ofoi
a need
to start (if selected) beforeoj
b (plus the relevant release times). Then, we can write the following
pairwise resource constraints:
ti
¯a−t j
b ≤ −λ+M(1−z i,j
a,b)o i
¯a∈S i
a,(r, λ)∈Ψ i
a,∃(r,·)∈Ψ i
b
tj
¯b −t i
a ≤ −λ ′ +M(1−z i,j
b,a)o j
¯b ∈S i
b,(r ′, λ′)∈Ψ i
b,∃(r ′,·)∈Ψ i
a
xi
a ≥z i,j
a,b +z i,j
b,a
xi
b ≥z i,j
a,b +z i,j
b,a
xi
a +x i
b −1≤z i,j
a,b +z i,j
b,a



{oi
a, oj
b} ∈ A.(2)
The first constraint says that if operationxi
a precedes operationx j
b and the release time of the
common resource for operationoi
a isλ, then we havet i
c +λ≤t j
b for all successor operationsoi
c
ofo i
a. Similarly the second. The third enforces the precedence decision when both operations are
selected, whereas the last two ensure that no precedence is impose when at least one of the two
operations is not selected.
Note that while the previous constraints guarantee exclusive use of common resource for each
pair of corresponding train operations, this is in general not enough to guarantee the feasibility
of a solution. The typical example involves two trains traveling in opposite directions and two
resources, where trainAtraverses first resourcer 1 (in 10 units of time) and thenr2 while train
Btraverses firstr 2 (in 10 units of time) and thenr1. Assuming that the release times are equal
to 0, a schedule witht A
r1 = 0, t A
r2 = 10andt B
r2 = 0, t B
r1 = 10would be feasible according the
constraints we defined so far (here we omitted the concept of train operations for simplicity of
presentation). Sometimes, this is calledswapping, as the trains are instantaneously swapping the
usage of resources at time 10.
The swapping behavior is prevented by imposing a global ordering of operations. For each
operationo i
a ∈O, we introduce a non-negative integer variableu i
a. Then, we simply order all
operations based on all their precedence relationships by introducing the followingordering con-
straints:
ui
a −u i
b ≤ −1 +M(1−y i
a,b) (o i
a, oi
b)∈S i, i∈I,
ui
¯a−u j
b ≤ −1 +M(1−z i,j
a,b)o i
¯a∈S i
a
uj
¯b −u i
a ≤ −1 +M(1−z i,j
b,a)o j
¯b ∈S j
b
)
{oi
a, oj
b} ∈ A.
(3)
Lastly, weneedtomodeltheobjectivefunction. Foreachobjectivecomponentc= (o i
a, t, γ, ζ)∈
C, we define a binary variablevc that is equal to 1 ifti
a − t≥0. We also define a nonnegative
continuous variablewc ∈R + to model the cost of each componentc. Then, we model the objective
components with the followingobjective constraints:
ti
a − t≤M v c c= (o i
a, t, γ, ζ)∈ C,
wc ≥γ(t i
a − t) +ζv c c= (o i
a, t, γ, ζ)∈ C. (4)
The first constraint makes sure thatvc = 1whent i
a ≥ t, while the second constraint models the
sum of the linear component with the step component.
The full MILP formulation then consists of minimizingP
c∈C wc subject to constraints (1) to
(4). A DISPLIB solution can then be retrieved from the solution of the MILP model by taking
all operationso i
a ∈Owithx i
a = 1and sorting them by(t i
a, ui
a), lexicographically.
6. Conclusions and future work
This paper presents the DISPLIB train dispatching problem, and a set of challenging bench-
mark problem instances derived from real-world train dispatching applications. The problem
10
instances are freely available online, and are accompanied by a verification program and a refer-
ence MILP solver implementation. The problem statement and the hardness of the instances has
been validated through a computational competition held in 2024-2025. We hope that this bench-
marking framework will spur innovation and interest in the field of train dispatching algorithms,
and provide an infrastructure for fruitful research advancing the state of the art.
We intend the DISPLIB benchmark set to be an ongoing effort, and we are currently gath-
ering additional problem instances from dispatching applications from multiple countries. Any
researchers or developers of train dispatching optimization applications who have data describing
relevant problem instances are welcome to contribute them to the authors for inclusion into a
future version of the DISPLIB benchmark set.
Acknowledgements
Thanks to SINTEF Digital, Siemens Mobility Italy, Wabtec Corporation, and Swiss Federal Rail-
ways (SBB) for providing/publishing raw data for the problem instances. Thanks to the organiz-
ers of the International Conference on Optimization and Decision Science (ODS) for supporting
and publicizing the competition. Thanks also to the members of the scientific committee of the
computational competition, Giorgio Sartor, Marcella Samà, Paolo Ventura, Steven Harrod, and
Dennis Huisman. This work was partially funded by the European Union through the project
MOTIONAL, Grant Agreement 101101973. Views and opinions expressed are however those of
the author(s) only and do not necessarily reflect those of the European Union or the Europe’s Rail
Joint Undertaking. Neither the European Union nor the Europe’s Rail Joint Undertaking can be
held responsible for them.
References
[1] Maurizio Boccia, Veronica Dal Sasso, Leonardo Lamorgese, Carlo Mannino, and Paolo Ven-
tura. Optimizing train dispatching for the Union Pacific Railroad. arXiv:2503.19535, 2025.
[2] Francesco Corman and Lingyun Meng. A review of online dynamic models and algorithms
for railway traffic management.IEEE Transactions on Intelligent Transportation Systems,
16(3):1274–1284, 2014.
[3] Anna Livia Croella, Bjørnar Luteberget, Carlo Mannino, and Paolo Ventura. A MaxSAT
approach for solving a new dynamic discretization discovery model for train rescheduling
problems.Computers & Operations Research, 167:106679, 2024.
[4] Veronica Dal Sasso, Leonardo Lamorgese, Carlo Mannino, Andrea Onofri, and Paolo Ventura.
A 0, 1 linear programming approach to deadlock detection and management in railways.
Transportation Science, 59(1):187–205, 2025.
[5] Veronica Dal Sasso, Leonardo Lamorgese, Carlo Mannino, Antonio Tancredi, and Paolo Ven-
tura. Easy cases of deadlock detection in train scheduling.Operations Research, 70(4):2101–
2118, 2022.
[6] George B Dantzig and John H Ramser. The truck dispatching problem.Management science,
6(1):80–91, 1959.
[7] Pedro José Correia Duarte, Stéphane Dauzère-Pérès, Dennis Huisman, Carlo Mannino, Gior-
gio Sartor, Norman Weik, and Philipp Widmann. 50 years of or in railway timetabling and
rolling stock planning.EURO Journal on Transportation and Logistics, page 100155, 2025.
[8] Wei Fang, Shengxiang Yang, and Xin Yao. A survey on problem models and solution ap-
proaches to rescheduling in railway networks.IEEE Transactions on Intelligent Transporta-
tion Systems, 16(6):2997–3016, 2015.
11
[9] Ambros Gleixner, Gregor Hendel, Gerald Gamrath, Tobias Achterberg, Michael Bastubbe,
Timo Berthold, Philipp Christophel, Kati Jarck, Thorsten Koch, Jeff Linderoth, et al. MI-
PLIB 2017: data-driven compilation of the 6th mixed-integer programming library.Mathe-
matical Programming Computation, 13(3):443–490, 2021.
[10] Marijn JH Heule, Markus Iser, Matti Järvisalo, and Martin Suda. Proceedings of sat compe-
tition 2024: Solver, benchmark and proof checker descriptions. 2024.
[11] INFORMSRailwayApplicationsSection(RAS). Dataandarchiveofpreviousproblemsolving
competition (web page).https://connect.informs.org/railway-applications/new-i
tem3/problem-repository16[accessed 2025-08-19].
[12] Julian Jordi. SBB Train Schedule Optimisation Challenge (web page).https://www.aicr
owd.com/challenges/train-schedule-optimisation-challenge[accessed 2025-08-19].
[13] Oddvar Kloster, Bjørnar Luteberget, Carlo Mannino, and Giorgio Sartor. An optimization-
based decision support tool for incremental train timetabling. InOperations Research Forum,
volume 4, page 65. Springer, 2023.
[14] Leonardo Lamorgese and Carlo Mannino. An exact decomposition approach for the real-time
train dispatching problem.Operations Research, 63(1):48–64, 2015.
[15] Leonardo Lamorgese, Carlo Mannino, and Erik Natvig. An exact micro–macro approach to
cyclic and non-cyclic train timetabling.Omega, 72:59–70, 2017.
[16] Leonardo Lamorgese, Carlo Mannino, Dario Pacciarelli, and Johanna Törnquist Krasemann.
Handbook of optimization in the railway industry, chapter Train dispatching, pages 265–283.
Springer, 2018.
[17] Nuannuan Leng, Zhengwen Liao, and Francesco Corman. Role of timetable, rolling stock
rescheduling, and information strategies to passengers in public transport disruptions.Trans-
portation Research Record, 2674(9):135–147, 2020.
[18] Florin Leutwiler and Francesco Corman. A logic-based benders decomposition for microscopic
railway timetable planning.European Journal of Operational Research, 303(2):525–540, 2022.
[19] Quan Lu, Maged Dessouky, and Robert C Leachman. Modeling train movements
through complex rail networks.ACM Transactions on Modeling and Computer Simulation
(TOMACS), 14(1):48–75, 2004.
[20] Sharada Mohanty, Erik Nygren, Florian Laurent, Manuel Schneider, Christian Scheller, Nil-
abha Bhattacharya, Jeremy Watson, Adrian Egli, Christian Eichenberger, Christian Baum-
berger, et al. Flatland-rl: Multi-agent reinforcement learning on trains.arXiv preprint
arXiv:2012.05893, 2020.
[21] Paola Pellegrini, Raffaele Pesenti, and Joaquin Rodriguez. Efficient train re-routing and
rescheduling: Valid inequalities and reformulation of recife-milp.Transportation Research
Part B: Methodological, 120:33–48, 2019.
[22] Gerhard Reinelt. TSPLIB—a traveling salesman problem library.ORSA journal on comput-
ing, 3(4):376–384, 1991.
[23] Giorgio Sartor, Carlo Mannino, Thomas Nygreen, and Lukas Bach. A milp model for quasi-
periodic strategic train timetabling.Omega, 116:102798, 2023.
[24] David Van Bulck and Dries Goossens. The international timetabling competition on sports
timetabling (itc2021).European Journal of Operational Research, 308(3):1249–1267, 2023.
[25] Chuntian Zhang, Jianguo Qi, Yuan Gao, Lixing Yang, Ziyou Gao, and Fanting Meng. In-
tegrated optimization of line planning and train timetabling in railway corridors with pas-
sengers’ expected departure time interval.Computers & Industrial Engineering, 162:107680,
2021.
12
Appendix A. The DISPLIB file format
The DISPLIB problem instances are stored as standard JSON files. The JSON object for a
DISPLIB problem instance contains two keys:trainsandobjective, giving the following overall
structure of the JSON file, where...is a placeholder:
{ "trains": [[{ ... operation ... }, ... ], ... ],
"objective": [{ ... component ... }, ... ] }
Appendix A.1. Trains
The top-leveltrainskey contains a list of trains, where each train is a list of operations.
References to specific trains are given as a zero-based index into thetrainslist, and references to
operations are given as a zero-based index into a specific train’s list of operations. Each operation
is a JSON object with the following keys:
•start_lb(optional, number): the earliest start time of the operation. Must be a non-
negative integer. If the key is not present, defaults to 0.
•start_ub(optional, number): the latest start time of the operation. Must be a non-negative
integer. If the key is not present, defaults to infinity (i.e., no upper bound).
•min_duration(number): the minimum duration, i.e., the minimum time between the start
time and the end time of the operation. Must be a non-negative integer.
•resources(optional, list): a list of resources used by the train while performing the opera-
tion. If the key is not present, defaults to the empty list. Each resource usage is given as a
JSON object with the following keys:
–resource(string): the name of a resource.
–release_time(optional, number): the release time for the resource, i.e., the minimum
duration between the end time of this operation and the start time of any subsequent
operation (of a different train) using the same resource. If the key is not present,
defaults to 0.
•successors(list): a list of alternative successor operations, given as zero-based indices into
the list of this train’s operation. The list must be non-empty unless this operation is the
exit operation.
For example, an operation that starts between time 7 and 8 and has a duration of 5 time units,
uses the resourceR1, and releases it immediately after the end event, and must be succeeded by
the operation with index 2, would be formatted as follows:
{ "start_lb": 7, "start_ub": 8, "min_duration": 5,
"resources": [{ "resource": "R1" }], "successors": [2] }
For each train, the list of operations is ordered topologically, i.e., all successors for an operation
appear after it in the list. Note that this also means that the entry operation will always be at
index 0, and the exit operation will always be the last operation in the list.
Appendix A.2. Objective
Thetop-levelobjectivekeycontainsalistofobjectivecomponents. Eachobjectivecomponent
is a JSON object containing the keytypefor determining an objective component type, and other
keys depending on the type. Only one type, calledoperation delay(see Sec. 2.1), is defined in
DISPLIB 2025 (thetypekey is included for forward compatibility).
The operation delay objective component is decribed as a JSON object with the following keys:
•type(string): must contain the string"op_delay".
•train(number): reference to a train as an index into the top-leveltrainslist.
13
•operation(number): reference to an operation as an index into the list defining the train’s
operation graph.
•threshold(number): a time after which this delay component is activated, as defined in
the formula above. If the key is not present, defaults to 0.
•increment(number): the constantdin the formula above. Must be a non-negative integer.
If the key is not present, defaults to 0.
•coeff(number): the constantcin the formula above. Must be a non-negative integer. If
the key is not present, defaults to 0.
For example, an objective component that measures the time that train 0’s operation 5 is
delayed beyond time 10, would be formatted as follows:
{ "type": "op_delay", "train": 0, "operation": 5,
"threshold": 10, "coeff": 1 }
Appendix A.3. Solution format
Solutions to a DISPLIB problem are given as a JSON object (typically in a separate file from
the problem instance), containing the following keys:
•objective_value(number): istheobjectivevalueofthesolution(accordingtotheobjective
from the problem instance).
•events(list): is an ordered list of start events, i.e. a list of references to operations to be
started in the given order. Each start event is described by a JSON object with the following
keys:
–time(number): the time at which to start the operation. Must be a non-negative
integer.
–train(number): reference to a train as an index into the top-leveltrainslist.
–operation(number): reference to an operation as an index into the list defining the
train’s operation graph.
Appendix A.4. An example problem
Let’s consider two trains meeting at a junction, coming from opposite directions. Train A is
currently occupying the left part of the track (resourceL), and may proceed either to the upper
right track (resourceR1), which train B is currently occupying, or to the lower right track (resource
R2), which is currently free.
ϕ0
A B
L R1
R2
The operation graphs for the two trains would look as follows:
The objective is to minimize the time when train B finishes traveling throughL. The JSON
problem instance for this problem is:
{
"trains": [
[{ "start_ub": 0,
"min_duration": 5,
"resources": [{ "resource": "L" }],
14
op 0,δ= 5
t= 0
res.:[L]
op 1,δ= 5
res.:[R1]
op 2,δ= 5
res.:[R2]
op 3,δ= 0
res.:[]
Train A
op 0,δ= 5
t= 0
res.:[R1]
op 1,δ= 5
res.:[L]
op 2,δ= 0
res.:[]
Train B
"successors": [1, 2] },
{ "min_duration": 5,
"successors": [3],
"resources": [{ "resource": "R1" }]},
{ "min_duration": 5,
"successors": [3],
"resources": [{ "resource": "R2" }]},
{ "min_duration": 0,
"successors": []}],
[{ "start_ub": 0,
"min_duration": 5,
"resources": [{ "resource": "R1" }],
"successors": [1]},
{ "min_duration": 5,
"resources": [{ "resource": "L" }],
"successors": [2]},
{ "min_duration": 0,
"successors": []}]],
"objective": [{ "type": "op_delay",
"train": 1,
"operation": 2,
"coeff": 1}]
}
The following JSON object is a feasible (and optimal) solution to the problem instance:
{ "objective_value": 10, "events": [
{"time": 0, "train": 0, "operation": 0},
{"time": 0, "train": 1, "operation": 0},
{"time": 5, "train": 0, "operation": 2},
{"time": 5, "train": 1, "operation": 1},
{"time": 10, "train": 1, "operation": 2},
{"time": 10, "train": 0, "operation": 3}] }
Note that this is an example where the global ordering of events is important beyond the
ordering implied by the time values: if we switch the ordering of the two events at time 5, the
result is not a feasible solution since operation 1 of train B allocatesLwhile it is still in use by
train A.
15